=head1 NAME

APR:PerlIO -- An APR Perl IO layer

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use APR::PerlIO ();
  
  sub handler {
      my $r = shift;
  
      open my $fh, ">:APR", $filename, $r or die $!;
      # work with $fh as normal $fh
      close $fh;
  
      return Apache::OK;
  }

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<APR::PerlIO> implements a Perl IO layer using APR's file
manipulation as its internals.

Why do you want to use this? Normally you shouldn't, probably it won't
be faster than Perl's default layer. It's only useful when you need to
manipulate a filehandle opened at the APR side, while using Perl.

Normally you won't call open() with APR layer attribute, but some
mod_perl functions will return a filehandle which is internally hooked
to APR. But you can use APR Perl IO directly if you want.

=head1 METHODS

Perl Interface:

=over

=item open()

To use APR Perl IO to open a file the four arguments open() should be
used. For example:

  open my $fh, ">:APR", $filename, $r or die $!;

where:

the second argument is the mode to open the file, constructed from two
sections separated by the C<:> character: the first section is the
mode to open the file under (E<gt>, E<lt>, etc) and the second section
must be a string I<APR>.

the fourth argument can be a C<Apache::RequestRec> or
C<Apache::ServerRec> object.

the rest of the arguments are the same as described by the I<open()>
manpage.

=back

The C interface provides functions to convert between Perl IO and
APR Perl IO filehandles.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The I<perliol(1)>, I<perlapio(1)> and I<perl(1)> manpages.

=cut

