=head1 NAME

mod_perl 2.0 Win32 Installation Instructions

=head1 Description

This document deals with installation specifics on Win32 platforms.

=head1 Synopsis

As described in the discussion of issues in L<multithreaded
win32|docs::1.0::os::win32::multithread>, a mod_perl 1.0 enabled server
based on Apache 1.3 on Win32 is limited to a single thread serving a
request at a time. This effectively prevents concurrent processing,
which can have serious implications for busy sites. This problem is
addressed in the multi-thread/multi-process approach of mod_perl
2.0/Apache 2.0.

Note that there are some threading issues in perl-5.6
(upon which ActivePerl builds 6xx are based) which may cause
problems with mod_perl 2.0. Because of this, it is (I<strongly>)
recommended
that perl-5.8 (ActivePerl builds 8xx) be used with mod_perl 2.0
on Win32.

=head1 Installing

Unless you are using an all-in-one package, you should
first install Perl and Apache, either from the sources or as binaries.
The Perl sources are available from L<http://www.cpan.org/src/>,
with directions for building contained in F<README.win32>.
ActiveState also makes the sources available for their binary
builds at L<ftp://ftp.activestate.com/ActivePerl/src/>,
which may contain, in particular, Win32-specific fixes not in the
CPAN Perl sources. As a binary, at present, an ActivePerl-compatible 
Perl, compiled with Visual C++, is the most common one used in the Win32 
mod_perl/Apache environment; you can obtain such a prebuilt Perl
binary from L<http://www.activestate.com/>.

The Apache sources and binaries are available at
L<http://httpd.apache.org/>.

As of this writing, mod_perl 2.0 is known to compile and work
with an ActivePerl-compatible Perl, both for builds 6xx, based
on perl-5.6.1, and builds 8xx, based on perl-5.8.0. However,
because of improved threading support, perl-5.8 is recommended 
for Win32 mod_perl 2.0. See the section on Apache/mod_perl binaries 
below for details on a suitable repository containing mod_perl
ppm packages, and also how to obtain other Win32 binary packages.

When installing Perl or other related binaries, subtleties may arise
in using path names that have spaces in them - you may, for example, 
have to specify F<C:\Program Files\> by the DOS 8.3 path name 
F<C:\Progra~1\> in certain Apache directives. If you want to avoid
this, install, if possible, these packages to locations without spaces
in their names (eg, F<C:\Perl> for Perl and F<C:\Apache2> for Apache 2.0).

In the following, it may be necessary to invoke certain commands 
through a DOS prompt. A DOS window may be opened either through
a I<Command Prompt> option of the I<Start> menu, or by choosing
to run, from the Start menu, C<command> or C<cmd>, as appropriate. 

=head2 Building from sources

If you are building mod_perl 2.0 from sources, it is probably also
best to do the same for Apache 2.0. The Apache 2.0 sources can be
obtained from L<http://httpd.apache.org/>, which when unpacked will
contain at the top-level a Visual Studio project file. Choose the
C<InstallBin - Win32 Release> target to build and install Apache 2.0,
which by default will be placed in F</Apache2>.

Having built and installed Apache 2.0, 
next obtain the mod_perl 2.0
First obtain the 
L<mod_perl 2.0 sources|download::source/2_0_Development_Source_Distribution>
as a C<tar.gz> file -
when unpacked, using Winzip or similar tools, a subdirectory
F<mod_perl-x.xx> will be created. Next, run the command

    C:\modperl_src> perl Makefile.PL MP_AP_PREFIX=\Path\to\Apache2

Then

    C:\modperl_src> nmake
    C:\modperl_src> nmake test

will build and test mod_perl 2.0. mod_perl 2.0 on Win32 is considered
at an alpha stage of development, so not all the tests may pass.

The final command,

    C:\modperl_src> nmake install

will install the necessary mod_perl 2.0 files into your Perl directory
tree, and also copy F<src/modules/perl/mod_perl.so> into
your F</Path/to/Apache2/modules/> directory. If you are installing
mod_perl 2.0 on a system that also contains mod_perl 1.0, then some
mod_perl 1.0 files will be overwritten by this procedure. This can be
avoided by preparing the build as

  C:\modperl_src> perl Makefile.PL MP_AP_PREFIX=\Path\to\Apache2 MP_INST_APACHE2=1

which will subsequently lead to the mod_perl 2.0 files being installed
under an F<Apache2> subdirectory in your Perl tree.  You will then
have to employ either a C<use Apache2;> line in your scripts/packages
or else a C<PerlModule Apache2> directive in Apache's F<httpd.conf>.

If this build fails, or you want features not present in the
official releases, you may want to try the sources obtained
from cvs - see the discussion on the
L<2.0 Development Source Distribution|download::source/2_0_Development_Source_Distribution>
for details. Be aware, though,
that as well as providing bug fixes, there may be new features being
added and tested in the cvs versions, so at any given time there are
no guarantees that these packages will build and test successfully.

=head2 PPM Packages

The first, for ActivePerl users, is through C<PPM> - this assumes you
already have ActivePerl (build 8xx is recommended) from 
L<http://www.activestate.com/> and a Win32 Apache 2.0 binary from 
L<http://httpd.apache.org/>. In installing this, you might avoid
some future problems by choosing installation directories that do
not have spaces in their names (eg, F<C:/Apache2>).

After installing Perl and Apache 2.0, you can then install mod_perl
via the C<PPM> utility. ActiveState does not maintain mod_perl in
their ppm repository, so you must get it from a different location
other than ActiveState's site. A quick way to do this is to download
the script F<mpinstall> and save it as, for example, I<mpinstall>.
Invoking this as C<perl mpinstall> on a command line
will take you through a dialogue, based on your configuration, 
which will determine and install, via C<ppm>, the desired 
mod_perl ppm package.

The direct way to install mod_perl via ppm is simply as (broken over two
lines for readability)

  C:\> ppm install
       http://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/ppmpackages/mod_perl-2.ppd

for ActivePerl 6xx builds, and

  C:\> ppm install
       http://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/ppms/mod_perl.ppd

for ActivePerl 8xx builds (at present, this latter repository does not
contain a mod_perl-1 package). Another way, which will be useful if you 
plan on installing additional Apache modules, is to set the repository
within the C<ppm> shell utility to

   http://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/cgi-bin/ppmserver?urn:/PPMServer

for ActivePerl 6xx builds, and to

   http://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/cgi-bin/ppmserver?urn:/PPMServer58

for ActivePerl 8xx builds. The repository may be set using

   ppm> set repository NAME LOCATION

for C<ppm2> and by

   ppm> rep add NAME LOCATION

for C<ppm3> - see the help utility within the C<ppm> shell for
details. mod_perl 2.0 can then be installed as

   ppm> install mod_perl-2

for builds 6xx and as

   ppm> install mod_perl

for builds 8xx.

This will install the necessary modules under an F<Apache2>
subdirectory in your Perl tree, so as not to disturb an existing
F<Apache> directory from mod_perl 1.0. See the section below on
configuring mod_perl to add this directory to the C<@INC> path for
searching for modules.

The mod_perl PPM package also includes the necessary Apache DLL
F<mod_perl.so>; a post-installation script should be run which will
offer to copy this file to your Apache2 modules directory (eg,
F<C:/Apache2/modules/>). If this is not done, get either
F<mod_perl-2.tar.gz> from
L<http://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/ppmpackages/x86/>, for builds 6xx, or
F<mod_perl.tar.gz> from
L<http://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/ppms/x86/>, for builds 8xx; 
when unpacked, this file
contains F<mod_perl.so> in the top-level directory.

Note that, because of binary incompatibilities, one should
I<not> install packages for ActivePerl 8xx from a repository
containing packages for ActivePerl 6xx, and vice-versa, particularly
if these packages contain XS-based modules.

Note that the mod_perl package available from this site will always
use the latest mod_perl sources compiled against the latest official
Apache release; depending on changes made in Apache, you may or may
not be able to use an earlier Apache binary. However, in the Apache
Win32 world it is particularly a good idea to use the latest version,
for bug and security fixes. If you encounter problems loading
F<mod_perl.so>, ensure that the mod_perl version you are using matches
that of Apache, make certain C<Perl> is in your C<PATH> environment
variable, or try adding the Apache directive

  LoadFile "C:/Path/to/your/Perl/bin/perlxx.dll"

before loading F<mod_perl.so>. If all else fails, a reboot may help.

=head2 All in one packages

At L<http://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/pub/other/> there is a self-extracting
archive F<Perl-5.8-win32-bin.exe> containing a binary version
of perl-5.8 (compatible with ActivePerl 8xx), together with Apache 2.0
and mod_perl 2.0. See the file F<Perl-5.8-win32-bin.readme> for
a description. If you have trouble
fetching the whole file at once, the directory
L<http://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/pub/other/Perl-5.8-win32-bin/>
contains this distribution split across multiple files -
see F<README.join> for instructions on how to join them. Alternatively,
if you have Perl already, you can get the script
F<distinstall> which, when invoked as
C<perl distinstall>, will fetch and join
the files for you.

=head1 See Also

The directions for L<configuring mod_perl 2.0 on
Win32|docs::2.0::os::win32::config>, the L<mod_perl
documentation|docs::index>, L<http://take23.org/>,
L<http://httpd.apache.org/>, L<http://www.activestate.com/>,
and the
L<FAQs for mod_perl on Win32|docs::general::os::win32::faq>.  
Help is also available through the archives of and subscribing to
the L<mod_perl mailing list|maillist::modperl>.

=head1 Maintainers

Maintainer is the person(s) you should contact with updates,
corrections and patches.

=over

=item * 

Randy Kobes E<lt>randy@theoryx5.uwinnipeg.caE<gt>

=back


=head1 Authors

=over

=item *

Randy Kobes E<lt>randy@theoryx5.uwinnipeg.caE<gt>

=back

Only the major authors are listed above. For contributors see the
Changes file.


=cut

